Add specification document for the LDAP package (#58)
ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-ldap: docs/spec/spec.md

# Specification: Ballerina LDAP Library

_Authors_: @Nuvindu \

> _Reviewers_:  \

Reviewer: Add reviewers

LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) is a vendor-neutral software protocol for accessing and maintaining distributed directory information services. It allows users to locate organizations, individuals, and other resources such as files and devices in a network. LDAP is used in various applications for directory-based authentication and authorization.

The Ballerina LDAP module provides the capability to efficiently connect, authenticate, and interact with directory servers. It allows users to perform operations such as searching for entries, and modifying entries in an LDAP directory, providing better support for directory-based operations.

If you have any feedback or suggestions about the library, start a discussion via a [GitHub issue](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-library/issues) or in the [Discord server](https://discord.gg/ballerinalang). Based on the outcome of the discussion, the specification and implementation can be updated. Community feedback is always welcome. Any accepted proposal, which affects the specification is stored under `/docs/proposals`. Proposals under discussion can be found with the label `type/proposal` in GitHub.

> The conforming implementation of the specification is released and included in the distribution. Any deviation from the specification is considered a bug.

Reviewer 2: Spec Introduction follows a standard template [1] Any reason to move away from that ?

[1] - https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-graphql/blob/master/docs/spec/spec.md#introduction

## Contents

1. [Overview](#1-overview)

> 2. [LDAP Client](#2-ldap-client)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [LDAP client](#2-ldap-client)
```

    * 2.1 [The `init` method](#21-the-init-method)

> 3. [Operation Types](#3-operation-types)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. [Operation types](#3-operation-types)
```

    * 3.1 [Add operation](#31-add-operation)
    * 3.2 [Modify operation](#32-modify-operation)
    * 3.3 [ModifyDN operation](#33-modifydn-operation)
    * 3.4 [Compare operation](#34-compare-operation)
    * 3.5 [Search operation](#35-search-operation)
    * 3.6 [Search with type operation](#36-search-with-type-operation)
    * 3.7 [Delete operation](#37-delete-operation)
    * 3.8 [Close operation](#38-close-operation)
4. [The `ldap:LdapResponse` type](#4-the-ldapldapresponse-type)
5. [The `ldap:Error` type](#5-the-ldaperror-type)

## 1. Overview

The Ballerina LDAP module provides support for interacting with directory servers which support LDAP protocol. This module provided various directory operations by establishing a connection to an LDAP server, allowing for tasks such as adding, modifying, deleting, and searching directory entries. It focus on ease of use and integration, making it straightforward for developers to perform directory-based operations within their Ballerina applications.

## 2. LDAP client

> The `ldap:Client` instance needs to be initialized before performing the functionalities. When initializing it connects to a directory server and performs various operations on directories. Currently, it supports the generic LDAP operations; `add`, `modify`, `modifyDN`, `compare`, `search`, `searchWithType`, `delete`, and `close`.

Reviewer 3: Should this be
```suggestion
The `ldap:Client` instance needs to be initialized before performing the functionalities. Once initialized, it can perform various operations on directories. Currently, it supports the generic LDAP operations; `add`, `modify`, `modifyDN`, `compare`, `search`, `searchWithType`, `delete`, and `close`.
```
?

### 2.1 The `init` method

> The `init` method initializes the `ldap:Client` instance using the parameters `hostName`, `port`, `domainName`, and `password`. The `hostName` and `port` parameters are used to bind the request and authenticate clients with the directory server, while the `domainName` and `password` parameters establish the connection to the server for performing LDAP operations. In case of failure, the method returns an `avro:Error`."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `init` method initializes the `ldap:Client` instance using the parameters `hostName`, `port`, `domainName`, and `password`. The `hostName` and `port` parameters are used to bind the request and authenticate clients with the directory server, while the `domainName` and `password` parameters establish the connection to the server for performing LDAP operations. In case of failure, the method returns an `ldap:Error`."
```

```ballerina
ldap:Client ldapClient = check new ({
   hostName,
   port,
   domainName,
   password
});
```

## 3. Operation types

> The main operation types in LDAP are listed here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The currently supported operation types in LDAP are listed here.
```

> ### 3.1 Add operation

Reviewer 2: API spec is not the same as API documentation. API specification deals with what a developer can do if he wants to write a specific library. So, the API spec would provide the relevant configurations types, request/response data types, and client API with proper documentation. 

IMO what we hv written is a user guide where users can refer to when using the LDAP client.

Author: LDAP already has their own spec explaining all the operations. I thought it would be redundant to add all those information here as well. I only added the parts that is relevant to the Ballerina LDAP client here

Reviewer 2: LDAP can have their own spec, but Ballerina LDAP should have a spec which describes how a developer can implement a LDAP package by him self.

### 3.2 Modify operation

Updates information of an entry in a directory server.

```ballerina
ldap:Entry user = {
    "sn": "user",
    "givenName": "updated user",
    "displayName": "updated user"
};
ldap:LdapResponse modifyResult = check ldap->modify(dN, user);
```

### 3.3 ModifyDn operation

Renames an entry in a directory server.

```ballerina
ldap:LdapResponse modifyResult = check ldap->modifyDn(dN, "CN=user1", true);
```

### 3.4 Compare operation

Determines whether a given entry has a specified attribute value.

```ballerina
ldap:LdapResponse compareResult = check ldap->compare(dN, "givenName", "user1");
```

### 3.5 Search operation

Returns a record containing search result entries and references that match the given search parameters.

```ballerina
ldap:SearchResult searchResult = check ldap->search("dc=example,dc=com", "(givenName=user1)", ldap:SUB);
```

### 3.6 Search with type operation

Returns a list of entries that match the given search parameters.

```ballerina
anydata[] searchResult = check ldap->searchWithType("dc=example,dc=com", "(givenName=user1)", ldap:SUB);
```

> ### 3.6.1 Search Scope

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.6.1 Search scope
```

The search scope defines the part of the target subtree that should be included in the search.

**BASE** : Indicates that only the entry specified by the base DN should be considered

**ONE** : Indicates that only entries that are immediate subordinates of the entry specified by the base DN (but not the base entry itself) should be considered

**SUB** : Indicates that the base entry itself and any subordinate entries (to any depth) should be considered

> **SUBORDINATE_SUBTREE** : Indicates that any subordinate entries (to any depth) below the entry specified by the base DN should be considered, but the base entry itself should not be considered, as described in draft-sermersheim-ldap-subordinate-scope.

Reviewer: Missing link to `draft-sermersheim-ldap-subordinate-scope`?

> ### 3.6.2 Search Filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.6.2 Search filter
```

    string hostName;
    int port;
    string domainName;
    string password;
|};
```

### 2.2 Initialization

The `init` method initializes the `ldap:Client` instance using the parameters `hostName`, `port`, `domainName`, and `password`. The `hostName` and `port` parameters are used to bind the request and authenticate clients with the directory server, while the `domainName` and `password` parameters establish the connection to the server for performing LDAP operations. In case of failure, the method returns an `ldap:Error`."

```ballerina
# Gets invoked to initialize the LDAP client.
#
# + config - The configurations to be used when initializing the client
# + return - A `ldap:Error` if client initialization failed
public isolated function init(*ConnectionConfig config) returns Error?;
```

## 3. Operation types

The currently supported operation types in LDAP are listed here.

### 3.1 Add operation

Creates an entry in a directory server.

```ballerina
# Creates an entry in a directory server.
# 
# + dN - The distinguished name of the entry
# + entry - The information to add
# + return - A `ldap:Error` if the operation fails or `ldap:LdapResponse` if successfully created

> remote isolated function add(string dN, Entry entry) returns LdapResponse|Error;

Reviewer 2: Shall we add a section to describe what is `ldap:Entry` ?

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-ldap/pull/58/commits/d393c7dc09629ff0a3b5de1ba92727c9c9538dc8

```

### 3.4 Compare operation

Determines whether a given entry has a specified attribute value.

```ballerina
# Determines whether a given entry has a specified attribute value.
# 
# + dN - The distinguished name of the entry
# + attributeName - The name of the target attribute for which the comparison is to be performed
# + assertionValue - The assertion value to verify within the entry
# + return - A `boolean` value indicating whether the values match, or an `ldap:Error` if the operation fails
remote isolated function compare(string dN, string attributeName, string assertionValue) returns boolean|Error;
```

### 3.5 Search operation

Returns a record containing search result entries and references that match the given search parameters.

```ballerina
# Returns a record containing search result entries and references that match the given search parameters.
#
# + baseDn - The base distinguished name of the entry
# + filter - The filter to be used in the search
# + scope - The scope of the search
# + return - An `ldap:SearchResult` if successful, or else `ldap:Error`

> remote isolated function search(string baseDn, string filter, SearchScope scope) returns SearchResult|Error;

Reviewer 2: Shall we add a section to describe `ldap:SearchScope` as well ?

Author: Fixed with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/module-ballerina-ldap/pull/58/commits/d393c7dc09629ff0a3b5de1ba92727c9c9538dc8

# Specification: Ballerina LDAP Library

_Authors_: @Nuvindu \
_Reviewers_: @NipunaRanasinghe @ayeshLK @DimuthuMadushan \
_Created_: 2024/08/11 \
_Updated_: 2024/08/11 \
_Edition_: Swan Lake

## Introduction

> This is the specification for the LDAP library of Ballerina language, which provides the capability to efficiently connect, authenticate, and interact with directory servers. It allows users to perform operations such as searching for entries, and modifying entries in an LDAP directory, providing better support for directory-based operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the specification for the LDAP library of Ballerina language, which provides the capability to connect, authenticate, and interact with directory servers. It allows users to perform operations such as searching for entries, and modifying entries in an LDAP directory, providing support for directory-based operations.
```

```ballerina
# Gets invoked to initialize the LDAP client.
#
# + config - The configurations to be used when initializing the client
# + return - A `ldap:Error` if client initialization failed
public isolated function init(*ConnectionConfig config) returns Error?;
```

## 3. Operation types

The currently supported operation types in LDAP are listed here.

### 3.1 Add operation

Creates an entry in a directory server.

```ballerina
# Creates an entry in a directory server.
# 
# + dN - The distinguished name of the entry
# + entry - The information to add
# + return - A `ldap:Error` if the operation fails or `ldap:LdapResponse` if successfully created
remote isolated function add(string dN, Entry entry) returns LdapResponse|Error;
```

#### 3.1.1 DNs and RDNs

The distinguished name (`DN`) of an entry is used to uniquely identify the entry and its location within the directory information tree (`DIT`) hierarchy. It's similar to how a file path specifies the location of a file in a filesystem.

> A `DN` consists of one or more comma-separated components known as relative distinguished names (`RDN`s). Typically, the leftmost component in the `DN` is considered the `RDN` for that entry. [Learn more](https://ldap.com/ldap-dns-and-rdns/)

Reviewer 3: These terminologies are currently defined under the `add` operation. but IMO they shouldn’t be, cuz the same terms are used throughout other APIs as well. It would be better to move them out of the add operation and mention them in a separate H3 section. wdyt?

Author: Fixed in 5129a1c

If you have any feedback or suggestions about the library, start a discussion via a [GitHub issue](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-library/issues) or in the [Discord server](https://discord.gg/ballerinalang). Based on the outcome of the discussion, the specification and implementation can be updated. Community feedback is always welcome. Any accepted proposal, which affects the specification is stored under `/docs/proposals`. Proposals under discussion can be found with the label `type/proposal` in GitHub.

The conforming implementation of the specification is released and included in the distribution. Any deviation from the specification is considered a bug.

## Contents

1. [Overview](#1-overview)
2. [LDAP client](#2-ldap-client)
    * 2.1 [Configurations](#21-configurations)
    * 2.2 [Initialization](#22-initialization)
    * 2.3 [DNs and RDNs](#23-dns-and-rdns)
    * 2.4 [The `ldap:Entry` type](#24-the-ldapentry-type)
    * 2.5 [The `ldap:LdapResponse` type](#25-the-ldapldapresponse-type)
    * 2.6 [The `ldap:Error` type](#26-the-ldaperror-type)

> 3. [Operation types](#3-operation-types)

Reviewer 3: I propose the following structure for the `client` section for better readability and categorization. wdyt?
<img width="493" alt="Screenshot 2024-09-03 at 15 05 43" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/57ac9ebd-09a9-45cd-b638-eca686054230">

Author: Fixed in 5de06c2

public type ConnectionConfig record {|
    string hostName;
    int port;
    string domainName;
    string password;
|};
```

### 2.2 Initialization

The `init` method initializes the `ldap:Client` instance using the parameters `hostName`, `port`, `domainName`, and `password`. The `hostName` and `port` parameters are used to bind the request and authenticate clients with the directory server, while the `domainName` and `password` parameters establish the connection to the server for performing LDAP operations. In case of failure, the method returns an `ldap:Error`."

```ballerina
# Gets invoked to initialize the LDAP client.
#
# + config - The configurations to be used when initializing the client
# + return - A `ldap:Error` if client initialization failed
public isolated function init(*ConnectionConfig config) returns Error?;
```

### 2.3 Connection handling

This section covers the operations related to managing the connection between the LDAP client and the directory server.

#### 2.3.1 Close operation

Unbinds from the server and closes the LDAP connection.

```ballerina
# Unbinds from the server and closes the LDAP connection.

> # 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

# + targetType - Default parameter use to infer the user specified type
# + return - An array of entries with the given type or else `ldap:Error`
remote isolated function searchWithType(string baseDn, string filter, SearchScope scope, typedesc<record{}[]> targetType = <>) returns targetType|Error;
```

### 3.6.1 Search scope

The `ldap:SearchScope` defines the part of the target subtree that should be included in the search.

**BASE** : Indicates that only the entry specified by the base DN should be considered

**ONE** : Indicates that only entries that are immediate subordinates of the entry specified by the base DN (but not the base entry itself) should be considered

**SUB** : Indicates that the base entry itself and any subordinate entries (to any depth) should be considered

**SUBORDINATE_SUBTREE** : Indicates that any subordinate entries (to any depth) below the entry specified by the base DN should be considered, but the base entry itself should not be considered, as described in [draft-sermersheim-ldap-subordinate-scope](https://docs.ldap.com/specs/draft-sermersheim-ldap-subordinate-scope-02.txt).

```ballerina
# Scope of the search operation.

> #

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

2. [LDAP client](#2-ldap-client)
    * 2.1 [Configurations](#21-configurations)
    * 2.2 [Initialization](#22-initialization)

>     * 2.3 [Connection Handling](#23-connection-handling)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * 2.3 [Connection handling](#23-connection-handling)
```

        * 2.3.1 [Close operation](#231-close-operation)
        * 2.3.2 [Connection availability operation](#232-connection-availability-operation)
    * 2.4 [DNs and RDNs](#24-dns-and-rdns)

>     * 2.5 [LDAP Data Types](#25-ldap-data-types)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * 2.5 [LDAP data types](#25-ldap-data-types)
```

public isolated function init(*ConnectionConfig config) returns Error?;
```

> ### 2.3 Connection Handling

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 2.3 Connection handling
```

This section covers the operations related to managing the connection between the LDAP client and the directory server.

#### 2.3.1 Close operation

Unbinds from the server and closes the LDAP connection.

```ballerina
# Unbinds from the server and closes the LDAP connection.
# 
remote isolated function close();
```

#### 2.3.2 Connection availability operation

Determines whether the client is connected to the server.

```ballerina
# Determines whether the client is connected to the server.
#
# + return - A boolean value indicating the connection status
remote isolated function isConnected() returns boolean;
```

### 2.4 DNs and RDNs

The distinguished name (`DN`) of an entry is used to uniquely identify the entry and its location within the directory information tree (`DIT`) hierarchy. It's similar to how a file path specifies the location of a file in a filesystem.

A `DN` consists of one or more comma-separated components known as relative distinguished names (`RDN`s). Typically, the leftmost component in the `DN` is considered the `RDN` for that entry. [Learn more](https://ldap.com/ldap-dns-and-rdns/).

> ### 2.5 LDAP Data Types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 2.5 LDAP data types
```
